
# User Centred Design

The public sector landscape has never offered the citizens of Scotland a richer, more exciting and more useful range of services and information than today. But with that comes a challenge - citizens must find their way through a plethora of organisations and services – any one of which (or, frequently, any combination of which) may have the potential to improve their quality of life, answer their questions, resolve their problems, provide them with a route to giving civic service, or change their lives. *If* they can find them and *if* they can access them in the right way and at the right time for their particular situation or life circumstances. Helping citizens manage that challenge is mygov.scot’s job.

Citizens come to mygov.scot with specific needs - which may be very straightforward (for example to find the phone number for a a local health centre) or very complex (for example to find out what care options and associated costs exist for an elderly relative). Our job is to help citizens meet their as quickly and easily as possible. This means we need to deliver the right information and in services in ways that are easily findable and understandable.

Citizens needs also have associated “contexts”. A simple need might also be a very urgent need. A complex need might also have many other associated issues such as emotional sensitivities, or it is a need that more than one person is involved with.  
Good design starts with users and need their needs and works from there. Find out here **(CHECK LINK->)** how we approach this challenge through User Centred Design.