---
layout: article
title:  "Proposed Process For The Recommendation And Endorsement Of Technical Standards Within Scottish Government"
---

# Proposed Process For The Recommendation And Endorsement Of Technical Standards Within Scottish Government## IntroductionThis paper proposes a process, which could be used within Scottish Government, to suggest and endorse industry standards for Scottish public sector. The policy paper ‘Scottish Government policy on open standards and open source’ outlines the potential benefits that the implementation of open standards could provide. Open standards include system interoperability, data and document formats. The defined process should give organisations within Scottish public sector a suitable level of assurance and guidance. 	## BackgroundThe [High Level Operating Framework](http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2013/06/1690/downloads) (October 2013) emphasises the importance of open standards and policies in the definition of IT solutions. Online Services are tasked, as part of this framework, to deliver approach to standards that can be used within Scottish public sector. The process proposed has matured from an initial five steps to seven. The process adopts learning’s from the UK Government approach. It is thought the new approach will provide an additional level of assurance to the Scottish public sector when being asked to adhere to endorsements made by Scottish Government. Other strategies also supporting the implementation of open standards include Scotland’s [Digital Future: Delivery of Public Services](http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/0040/00407741.pdf) (September 2012) and [Scotland’s Digital Future - Delivery of Public Services, Central Government Strategy](http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/0041/00414287.pdf) (February 2013).The process also acknowledges current UK Government policy.  The UK Government has both established [Open Standards Principles](https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/78892/Open-Standards-Principles-FINAL.pdf) (November 2012) and has embarked on wide consultation through an [Open Standards Consultation](https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/78889/Government-Response.pdf) (November 2012) – touching both civil and non-civil servants. ## Objectives
The proposal should look to ensure transparency and openness throughout the process, putting users’ needs at the heart of any endorsement. The process will:
- Identify roles and responsibilities for individuals, boards and groups- Identify stages through initial proposal to implementation- Suggest activities to be undertaken at each stage
The process should also provide a suitable level of assurance to Scottish public sector through consultation and transparent decision making for endorsement.

## Roles and Responsibilities
### CitizensCitizens include individuals within the public who wish to suggest areas where technical standardisation could provide a benefit. Citizens could be technology professionals or people who are transacting with Government.  Citizens would be responsible for suggestions and helping to mature these to challenges, in conjunction with the senior responsible owner. Citizens will also be engaged throughout the process via regular public consultation.### Service ProviderService providers include individuals or organisations within Scottish Government and Scottish public sector who are primarily interested in building digital services or integrating with existing services. Service providers will likely have expertise in designing, building and acquiring IT systems.### Senior Responsible OwnerA senior responsible owner should be responsible for assessing suggestions where the use of  standards could provide benefit. A senior responsible owner should be appointed from within Scottish Government and will act as a sponsor. They should identify the business purpose, be knowledgeable in the area and champion implementation. ### User Intelligence Group (UIG)The user intelligence group should be responsible for investigating and appraising challenges, providing subject matter expertise. The user intelligence group should include broad sectoral representation and will likely include a proportion of service providers. ### Scottish Government Governance Boards & GroupsA governance board or working group should be utilised to provide the final endorsement of a standard (or standards). They should be representative and be in a position to make an informed decision after consultation. The current Scottish Government boards, which would be considered to have an interest in the approval of  standards, include: - Scottish Government Technical & Design Board, supported by the Open Standards and Open Source Advisory Group- Scottish Government Data Management Board, supported by the Open Data Working Group- Mygov.scot Board, supported by the Planning, Advisory & Implementation GroupIt is suggested that the Technical & Design Board fulfil the role of endorsing  standards relevant to the public sector as a whole. This is dependent upon there being subject matter knowledge within the user intelligence group to provide suitable assurance to the board.  ### Technology Leaders
A technology leader will be a responsible individual from Scottish Government or Scottish public sector tasked with overseeing the implementation of endorsed standards in their directorate or organisation. 
Technology leaders can also be users through creating suggestions.
## Recommendation & Endorsement Process
### 1. Suggestion
Citizens or service providers will propose suggestions on areas where standards would solve a particular challenge they face. Suggestions should provide a short description, outline a clear user need and explore any associated benefits.
Suggestions will need to be assessed in the first instance to see if it is something that is appropriate for standardisation. This will include understanding the need and associated benefits.If it is agreed that a suggestion should develop into a challenge, a senior responsible owner should be appointed. The senior responsible owner should be picked based upon expertise and influence. They will mature the suggestion and will be expected to own the challenge and lead the subsequent endorsement process. ### 2. ChallengeThe challenge should provide a short description, articulate a clear user need, expected benefits and technical or functional requirements.The senior responsible owner will be responsible for publishing the challenge. The challenge should be made available in a way that maximises its exposure and ensures a suitable level of feedback is received as to its appropriateness. This could involve the creation of some form of central solution, in the form of a publicly available website.### 3. InvestigationThe senior responsible owner should look to initiate an investigation of relevant existing standards. Wherever possible the standard should be an open standard. This will involve forming a user intelligence group, with the expectation that they may provide advice on what relevant standards are available to address the challenge.Either a single proposal or multiple proposals may be available at this stage, depending upon the outcome of the appraisal. Each proposal will outline a specific standard.The challenge should have received enough feedback from service providers and / or citizens, as well as from the UIG, such that it becomes possible to decide whether or not to progress to a more formal appraisal. The decision to progress lies with the senior responsible owner.Each standard taken forward from this stage will be described as a “ proposed standard”.### 4. Appraisal
The user intelligence group should be responsible for the appraisal of the proposed standards that have been identified during investigation of the challenge.  This will include an assessment of each proposed standard’s technical as well as sectoral applicability.An objective and relative assessment of the proposals will be made by the UIG, with guidance from the senior responsible owner.The senior responsible owner will be decide whether to take the preferred proposal through to recommendation. If a standard is taken forward from the appraisal stage it will be described as a “provisional standard”. Sectors / programmes may choose to adopt proposed standards under ‘pilot conditions’ to provide further information with regards to the standard’s viability.
### 5. Recommendation
If appraisal indicates that a suitable standard exists to address the challenge it will be formally documented as a recommendation. The recommendation should clearly articulate:
- Applicability to the challenge;- Justification for selection;- Credibility of standards body;- Credibility of standardisation approach;- Breadth of experience of membership for standardisation process;- Depth of experience of membership for standardisation process;- Length of time standard has existed;- Industry acceptance or adoption;- Evidence of successful use;- Alignment with EU / UK / Scottish legislation. 
### 6. Endorsement
The endorsement of a standard is its approval by Scottish Government for its use within Scottish public sector. The senior responsible owner will first submit the recommendation to the appropriate sectoral board for approval (for example, the mygov.scot board).If the sectoral board endorses the recommendation and, if it is identified that the standard has relevance to the whole Scottish Public Sector, then the recommendation will be passed to The Technology & Design Board for evaluation. Should The Technical & Design Board choose to endorse the recommendation, then adherence to the standard will become mandatory within Scottish Government and Scottish public sector. It would be expected that an architectural principle would be added to the High Level Operating Framework to reflect the new standard.If a standard is endorsed by a sector / programme or The Technical Design Board it will referred to as an “active standard”.
### 7. Implementation
The implementation of a standard would be mandatory by all technology leaders (at sectoral or national level) after endorsement. The senior responsible owner should provide guidance that will be made available to technology leaders who are responsible for implementation.The technology leader will be responsible for ensuring digital systems within their directorate or organisation implement any endorsed standards. Standards should be implemented both for the acquisition (COTS) and construction (specially written software) of IT systems. There should also be a method for tracking implementation. It is suggested technology leaders publish progress against endorsed standards.
### 8. Review
As a part of the endorsement step above a target review date will be specified for the standard. A typical review frequency for a standard would be every 12 months. When the review target date is passed the Technical & Design Board will ask the sectoral / programme board that proposed the standard to perform a review of the standard to confirm that it is still relevant to and applicable for the Scottish public sector.
If the standard is still applicable the Technical and Design board will update the target review data and Scottish public sector will continue to implement the standard. If the standard is no longer applicable the standard will be marked as obsolete. Members of the Technical & design board will communicate that the standard has been obsoleted and sectors / programmes will evaluate and realise any appropriate remedial action.The Technical Design Board may, if appropriate, initiate further research or other consultation to identify a relevant standard that covers equivalent subject matter to the now obsolete standard.
